# Drizzle
The database layer is controlled by [Drizzle](https://github.com/drizzle-team/drizzle-orm). Drizzle table definitions should be generated from your [ving schema](/ving/server/ving-schema).

## Migrations
Migrations are files created to help you migrate changes from one version of your database to another. In some systems you have to manually write migrations. But in ving you don't. 

### Generate Database Migrations

Drizzle can automatically generate database migrations based upon changes in the Drizzle table definitions. You run that command like this:

```bash
./ving.mjs drizzle --prepare
```

### Apply Database Migrations 

Drizzle can automatically apply migrations to your database by running this command:

```bash
./ving.mjs drizzle --up
```

## Writing Queries
Normally you shouldn't have to write many queries as [ving records](/ving/server/ving-record) should handle a lot of that for you. But if you write complex backends like we do then inevitably you'll need to write some.

Writing Drizzle queries looks a lot like how you would write them with SQL, only in typescript. The [official Drizzle documentation](https://github.com/drizzle-team/drizzle-orm/blob/main/drizzle-orm/src/mysql-core/README.md) is quite sparse at the time of this writing. They are working on a more complete set of documentation. However, if you look in the `/tests/users.drizzle.test.mjs` file or `/server/vingrecord/VingRecord.mjs` file you can see some working examples.

We've exported a list of the useful drizzle utilities into a single file called `/server/drizzle/orm.mjs`. Below is an example of how you might use this:

```js
import {eq} from './server/drizzle/orm.mjs';
import {UsersTable} from './server/drizzle/schema/User.mjs';
import {useDB} from './server/drizzle/db.mjs';

const db = useDB()
const result = await db.select().from(UsersTable).where(eq(UsersTable.email, 'joe@example.com'));
```

Or if you are using [ving records](/ving/server/ving-record) then its even easier:

```js
import {Users} from './server/vingrecord/records/User.mjs';
import {eq} from './server/drizzle/orm.mjs';

const result = await Users.select().where(eq(Users.email, 'joe@example.com'));
```