---
outline: deep
---
# Environment Variables
Everything that can be changed between various deployments of Ving from QA to Production to individual developer laptops is controlled in the `.env` file in the root of the ving project folder. Thus `.env` is excluded from git, as it should be different for each deployment. We then make use of these variables through Node's `--env-file` CLI parameter.

There are two types of variables that can end up in `.env`, editable and generated variables.

## Editable Variables
Editable Variables are variables that you, the developer or devops person, are required to provide.

### VING_SKIPJACK_KEY
This sets the encryption key for the algorithm that obsucates database IDs in URLs making them unguessable to the public. It should be a series of 1 to 10 random numbers separated by commas.

```bash
VING_SKIPJACK_KEY=3,493,19,1,5,7,11,9393,11,19429
```

Note that changing this after your site is in the wild will change all the keys that external users may have stored in their use of your Rest endpoints. Also, if you don't set this we'll just use our own set of numbers, but then anybody that has access to the Ving source code could figure out the values of your ids.

### VING_MYSQL
```bash
VING_MYSQL="mysql://ving:fdsfdsfdsdsf@localhost:3380/ving"
```
You can also add `log=yes` to the end if you would like to see all SQL queries end up in your ving.log for debugging purposes.

```bash
VING_MYSQL="mysql://ving:ksdksdfllsdf@localhost:3380/ving?log=yes"
```

### VING_SMTP
The configuration URL for your SMTP server.
```bash
VING_SMTP="smtp://AKIAdsfadasfTZZD:BadsfsdfsdsLL@email-smtp.us-east-1.amazonaws.com:465/?tls=yes&log=yes"
```
The `tls` and `log` sections on the end of the URL are optional. Remove the `tls` section if your SMTP server doesn't support TLS encrypted communication. And remove the `log` section if you don't want to put every email outcome into your ving.log.

### VING_EMAIL_OVERRIDE
If this exists, all outgoing emails will go to this email address instead of their intended address. This is of course great for development purposes, and should not be used in production.
```bash
VING_EMAIL_OVERRIDE="mytestemail@gmail.com"
```

### VING_REDIS
A connection string to your Redis install.
```bash
VING_REDIS="redis://localhost:6379"
```
Can also include username and password like this:
```bash
VING_REDIS="redis://user:pass@localhost:6379"
```

Note that if you're hosting on AWS, all Redis instances there have TLS enabled by default, so the URL prefix will have 2 's' at the end like this: `rediss://`.

### AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID
The access key that will be used to deploy resources and access S3.
```bash
AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID="JKHHGJKLHHGKL"
```

### AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY
The secret access key for AWS that will be used to deploy resources and access S3.
```bash
AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY="afsdlkjlkafsjdlkjasfdkjlalskfasdf"
```

### AWS_REGION
The AWS region you want to deploy services in.
```bash
AWS_REGION="us-east-1"
```

### VING_SITE_URL
The URL of this site as it should appear in generated URLs. Should not end in a `/`.
```bash
VING_SITE_URL="http://localhost:3000"
```

## Generated Variables
Generated variables are generated by one of Ving's subsystems, usually [CDK](subsystems/cdk), for resources that are automatically configured and then must be referenced later. 

### VING_LAMBDA_PROCESS_UPLOADS_URL
This is the location of the AWS Lambda function that post processes [S3File](rest/S3File) uploads.
```bash
VING_LAMBDA_PROCESS_UPLOADS_URL="https://yvgmjfp5c7aasfdgf3efqhy0vbkll.lambda-url.us-east-1.on.aws/"
```

### VING_AWS_UPLOADS_BUCKET
This is the name of the S3 bucket that will hold [S3File](rest/S3File) uploads.
```bash
VING_AWS_UPLOADS_BUCKET="ving-dev-uploads-ea6sd53e"
```

### VING_AWS_UPLOADS_KEY
The the IAM key that will be used to grant users access to upload a file to the VING_AWS_UPLOADS_BUCKET.
```bash
VING_AWS_UPLOADS_KEY="dssasdflkjadfslasfdRE7IQ"
```

### VING_AWS_UPLOADS_SECRET
The the IAM secret that will be used to grant users access to upload a file to the VING_AWS_UPLOADS_BUCKET.
```bash
VING_AWS_UPLOADS_SECRET="sssljadsflkjalsdfslfNLzO"
```

### VING_AWS_THUMBNAILS_BUCKET
This is the name of the S3 bucket that will hold [S3File](rest/S3File) uploads generated thumbnails.
```bash
VING_AWS_THUMBNAILS_BUCKET="ving-dev-thumbnails-6dsd53cc"
```

## ving.json
As a side note there is also a `ving.json` file. That is used to store configurable data that does not change between modes of deployment. Usually you'll set this data when you set up your project, and then likely will never change it again.

### site
This section deals with data relating to the site.

### site.email
The email address that messages generated by the site should come from by default.
```json
"email": "info@example.com",
```

### site.name
The name of this site.
```json
"name": "ving",
```

### site.logoUrl
The relative path of a logo in your repo to display in emails and on the site.

```json
"logoUrl": "/ving.svg",
```

### site.streetAddress
An array containing the physical street address of the entity that owns the site. This is required for compliance with anti-spam laws.

```json
"streetAddress": [
    "123 Main Street",
    "Madison, WI 53701",
    "USA"
]
```