# Components

## AdminNav
Displays the site-wide administrative navigation.

```html
<AdminNav :crumbs="breadcrumbs" />
```

See `Crumbtrail` for more info about the `crumbs` prop.

## Crumbtrail
Displays a crumbtrail navigation.

```html
<Crumbtrail :crumbs="breadcrumbs" />
```

Props:

- **crumbs** - An array of objects containing:
    - **label** - A string for the page name.
    - **to** - A string of the page to navigate to.


## FieldsetItem
A fieldset element within a `FieldsetNav`.

```html
<FieldsetItem name="Foo">
Forms go here...
</FieldsetItem>
```

Props:

- **name** - The name of the field set.

## FieldsetNav
An inline page nav for a large scrollable form to be divided up into sections using `FieldsetItem`.

```html
<FieldsetNav>
    <FieldsetItem name="Content">...</FieldsetItem>
    <FieldsetItem name="Taxonomy">...</FieldsetItem>
    <FieldsetItem name="Privileges">...</FieldsetItem>
</FieldsetNav>
```

## Form
A form element to allow coordination of validation of inputs.
```html
<Form :send="someFunc()">...</Form>
```

Props:

- **send** - A function that should be executed once the form is sumbmitted and fields have been validated.

## FormInput
Generate the appropritate form field based upon input types.

```html
<FormInput name="username" v-model="user.username" />
```

Props:

- **label** - A form label for proper ARIA compliance.
- **type** - Defaults to `text` but can also be `textarea`, `password`, `number`, or `email`.
- **name** - The field name for the form input. Required.
- **id** - Defaults to whatever the `name` field is set to, but can be any string.
- **append** - Appends an input group to the end of the field. Example: `.00`
- **prepend** - Prepends an input group to the front of the field. Example `$`
- **autocomplete** - Sets the browser's autocomplete settings for password fillers and whatnot. Defaults to `off`.
- **v-model** - What Vue reactive variable should this be connected to? Required.
- **placeholder** - Text to be displayed if the input is empty.
- **required** - A boolean that defaults to `false`, but if true will not allow the form to be sent if empty.
- **step** - An amount to increment a `number` type field. Defaults to `1`.
- **mustMatch** - An object containing:
    - **field** - A label for a field or some other attribute such as `Password`. 
    - **value** - The value that this field must match.
- **class** - A CSS class that should be applied to the field.


## FormLabel
An ARIA compliant label for a form field.

```html
<FormLabel id="foo" label="Foo" />
```

Props:
- **label** - The text to display to the user.
- **id** - The unique id of the form field this label refers to.


## FormSelect
A form select list.

```html
<FormSelect>
```

Props:

- **label** - The text label to display to the user.
- **id** - The unique id of the form field. Defaults to whatever is in the `name` field.
- **v-model** - What Vue reactive variable should this be connected to? Required.
- **name** - The field name for the form input. Required.
- **options** - An array of objects:
    - **label** - The human readable label for the value.
    - **value** - The value to select. Can be string, number, or boolean.

## Pager
Displays a pagination bar for a [useVingKind() result set](/ving/ui/composables/usevingkind).

```html
<Pager :kind="users" />
```

Props:

- **kind** - A [useVingKind() object](/ving/ui/composables/usevingkind).
